#
                                                        Our Man In Cuba Never Expected This


                                                    Will this foreign military follow orders to fire on protesters in the streets?
                                                    How will the public respond if there is an embargo on medical imports?
                                                    What conditions could catapult them into civil war? Are they close?
                                                    What is the contagion effect of that civil war into the region?
                                                    How will foreign investment respond to a mass general strike?
                                                    How is President Voldemort’s campaign in support of polygamy resonating with the public?
                                                    Will Imaginaria attack Fakelandia in the next year?


These are just a small sample of the questions I am asked on a near weekly basis as an analyst with the US Intelligence Community (USIC).  For the past 15-plus years, I have culled through open source  and classified data to make sense of the strategic direction of foreign countries and their impact on US national interests.  The process involves a great deal of research and discussions with subject matter experts and culling through vast amounts of raw data—not unlike writing a PhD dissertation in humanities or social sciences.  Although, we then have to truncate it down to no more than two pages! Around five years into my tenure, I stumbled upon a new set of colleagues who were doing incredible things with all this raw data.  Rather than reading it piecemeal as I and my other “qualitative” analysts were doing, these officers—data scientists—were using computers and computer programs that they had developed to ingest these vast amounts of data  and then created models  to simulate possible outcomes of different exogenous shocks to a country’s economy, military, and/or leadership.  It was absolutely baffling to me how these wizards could take input that we—the subject matter experts—gave them based on what we knew about the society’s culture, demographics, and history and combine that with incoming new data to create a machine model that would churn all this information and recalibrate outputs on what the actors could or, potentially, would do based on new information.  As these data scientists developed these models, we—the subject matter experts—were able to use the models to better understand the broader environment in the complex adaptive systems of a foreign country’s civil society and government and helped us challenge our own key assumptions and biases about the drivers we were considering.  Other times, it assisted us in developing a framework to bound a particularly large or vexing problem, and extract key indicators and signposts of significant but slowly evolving changes that altered historic analysis. 

It became very clear very quickly that these data scientists were able to capture the complexity that we analysts had been grappling with to explain to our customers—sometimes policymakers who had very little prior exposure or knowledge of the foreign country—in digestible visual formats for policymakers.  Some were even able to create interactive visual graphics to demonstrate what the written word failed to really capture for a busy policymaker who wanted to know what s/he needed to know right away. 

For the last decade, I have worked closely with these data scientists, relying on them to leverage machine learning to pull new insights from this data.  I have felt for some time that I have stagnated in my skills as an analyst and  that to really push my subject matter expertise and continually develop more sophisticated analysis, I would need to be able to speak to a topic grounded in both quantitative and qualitative rigor .  I have experienced how each improves the other in a feedback loop of sorts.  And while my data scientists colleagues and friends are quite skilled at their jobs, I could never shake the desire to want to be able to perform these “magic acts” myself and learn how exactly the magician was pulling this rabbit out of its hat!  I wanted to go from being an audience member to the magician’s assistant.  And maybe, just maybe, I could one day even venture further and become the magician myself! Enter General Assembly’s Data Science bootcamp.  

As a journalism and history major who only passed the most basic of introductory statistics and finance courses in school —nearly two decades ago—with great effort, I knew the course would be challenging but I never imagined how thoroughly sisyphian it feels at times.  As a professional writer, dictionaries used to be my best friend.  That is, until  GA Boot Camp.  I never realized the terror they can wreak when trying to build code for a Pokeman game.  At the same time, I am pretty sure my neighbors heard my shrieks of absolute joy when I finally got some of the more difficult code to work in that Pokeman game or in other assignments after working at it for DAYS. And now, when I watch my 6 year-old son on his tablet playing “Among Us” with his friends or building the best cow enclosure he can in “Minecraft”, I have a newfound deep appreciation for the countless hours it must have taken these programmers to create these games from the basic building blocks I have learned the last two weeks.  

Despite the struggle, or perhaps because of it, I am more committed to getting these skills that I have coveted for so long.  In 3 months, I will walk back into the office with a new found appreciation for all the efforts that my colleagues have put in to all the models and data visualizations I have asked of them in the past. And this time, I will be pulling up my sleeves doing it right alongside them.  Now, when they groan about having to clean the data I can truly commiserate .  And next time, when a friend and colleague tells me she spent HOURS looking through pages of code only to find that she had accidentally inserted a semicolon in place of a colon, I will knowingly reach for my wallet as I go out and buy her a bottle of wine because I know what torment she has gone through. 
