                                                                        WHO’S YOUR DATA?

Big data. It has become the new term to describe the zeitgeist of this decade.  Every interaction an individual has on the web—whether shopping, emailing, chatting, or even browsing—is captured in terabytes of data and if not used by those capturing it, sold to companies willing to extrapolate all sorts of information about you in order to market their products specifically to your interests.  Concerns about the privacy of the collection of this information has been left in the dust as consumers have, for the most part, willingly surrendered privacy for convenience (quick: ask Alexa about anything and see how quickly advertisements for similar products show up in your Facebook feed. While a bit creepy, you have to admit that you are now looking at those ads on Facebook).  The question now becomes: who owns this data? You—the consumer—generated it.  The companies captured it.  One cannot exist without the other, and yet, the companies are the ones profiting billions off of this data—while you, you are likely getting inundated with campaigns marketing the latest things of your interest and adding one more thing to your credit card bill.

So, if the companies value this information greatly—and they do because they spend large amounts of resources to capture and process this data because it allows them to generate billions in profit –
shouldn’t you be able to get a piece of that billion-dollar pie?  After all, if you worked for the company and helped them make billions, they would pay you a salary, maybe a bonus.  By you willingly providing them this data, should you not be compensated in some way?

This has become the latest battle in the data world.  Who owns the data? And should consumers be compensated for their data? Companies such as Facebook and Google argue that you—the consumer/user—own your own data, but that’s not entirely true.  Facebook and google can sell your information not just directly in aggregated form—but also by selling direct to consumer advertisements.  So that super sweet new mountain bike with GPS tracker that you “stumbled” upon when you opened your internet browser? Yea, that was a direct ad sale google made to that bike company where they pitched that they could put your eyes (the one who would most likely buy that bike) on that advertisement.  How did they know you would be so amenable to that bike? Because they have been collecting data from you since the moment you connected to your computer—from the searches you do, the emails you send, the purchases you have already made, the things you have “liked”.  Now, google made a lot of money selling that ad space to that bike company. The bike company, in turn, made a lot of money selling that bike to you.  You are the only one who ended up losing money(but yes, getting a bike in return) and yet none of this would have been possible without you and the insight you provided both companies. Wouldn’t it be nice if you could at least get some compensation for it? But how? And from who? Does google owe you that money? Or does the bike company? And how much? If you buy a $1000 bike but I buy a $30 helmet, should we both get the same amount of compensation?  For now, lawmakers have thrown up their hands and decided it’s too difficult to decide so we keep going the way we have been. (Though, to be fair, most lawmakers do not understand the intricacies of technology even without lobbyists who are clearly in favor of maintaining the status quo).

As more and more people interact with technology, consumers are becoming a bit more wise to the way of consumer-driven data.  According to research done by mePrism, a start-up focused on helping consumers control their data, 64 percent of consumers think their own data is a more valuable asset than Bitcoin but underestimate its worth by thousands of dollars.  The study found that while 66 percent of Americans felt confident that they knew the kinds of data being collected about them, nearly 70 percent did not understand that information about their family members and friends—data inherently stored by platforms and social networks—are collected from their profiles. All of this information and data continues to be collected, processed, sold, and monetized, without any compensation to those generating the data.  Some states and companies have entered into the fray to try to monetize consumer information—that is, to allow consumers to sell their own personal data.  Companies like MePrism and states like California are trying to harness this consumer power and create a more even playing field between corporations and consumers.  Should they succeed in doing it, and doing it at a large scale, the revolution it would produce in the market economy would be akin to the creation of the credit market that revolutionized the 20th century market economy and produced wealth in volumes unheard of in previous centuries. For now though, I need to get back to doing some internet shopping for holiday gifts for my boys—who are 7 and 3. And yes, I did just write that so the algorithm could pick it up and send me gift suggestions.
